---
layout: default
---
## Songs of Revolution - Music in Politics
July 14, 2021

Hello Readers! I was recently reading an article about protests and revolutions, and what caught my eye as a similarity in all of these was a “slogan”, a call to citizens or a battle-cry. It provides a uniting call to its followers, imbibes them with a sense of solidarity and unity, and often, summarizes their cause or ideal. 
Here I pondered, why stop at a slogan, when you can extend this to something more powerful and something more likely to be remembered down the line, perhaps generations after the cause is achieved (or not). I am of course, talking about “music, the great communicator” as the RHCP song Can’t Stop puts it. Several movements have had memorable songs associated to them, and some are sung and remembered to this day (sometimes for vastly different purposes). I thought it would be interesting to talk about a few of them and look at the stories behind them.
The first song on my list wasn’t originally a song, but a poem, which was put into song. “Vande Mataram”, which translates to “I bow to thee, mother”, written by the Bengali poet Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay, was a poem in the author’s 1882 novel Anandamath. This was at a time when the British Raj was actively trying to push “God Save the Queen” to its subjects, which was of course greatly disliked by the Indian nationalists. Chattopadhyay, a civil servant, is said to have spontaneously come up with the words to the poem during a session with other fellow poets at his house in Chuchura in Bengal. The poem was first sung by no less than Rabindranath Tagore, at a session of the Congress, in the late 1870s.
Vande Mataram is an ode to the motherland which at that time, stretched from Burma all the way to Kandahar. It describes the fertile lands, cool breeze, of the country, and intends to spark nationalism and love for one’s country. As with the National Anthem, Vande Mataram is more than just the lyrics as we know it today. The Constituent Assembly of India accepted the first two verses as the National Song of India in 1950, but the poem goes on for four more verses. I would have attempted a translation, but would not be able to capture the feel of the imagery the original Bengali poem portays. I have only read an extremely small selection of Bankim Chandra’s works, mostly for school coursework but I do remember the unique pre-Tagore style, and his ability to portray scenes through words. I hope to read more of his works in the future.
A version sung by the bard himself can be found [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V8b3zHX7yE4)

No tale of revolutions can be complete without the mention of the French Revolution. After the fall of Louis XVI in French, other European monarchies became concerned that the spread of republican and revolutionary ideas was dangerous for their own regimes, and must be quelled at all costs. Accordingly, in the 1790s. Austria, the then-dominant power in Europe, and a few others including Britain (yep, those guys really didn’t sit quiet at all), declared war on the nascent French Republic. It was during this war that ‘La Marseillaise’ was conceived as a call to arms for all Frenchmen to defend their county against the foreign tyranny. Since then, ‘La Marseillaise’ has always been emblematic of the French people, and on several occasions been a spectator to iconic moments. Whether it was the Fall of France in summer of 1940, or the Charlie Hebdo shootings in 2015, La Marseillaise has been a symbol of French resilience. It has even been used in the 1942 epic 'Casablanca', in what is arguably one of the most stirring moments in cinema history
The song is different from the others in this list due to its complexity. Whereas songs of revolutions tend to be simple and easily sung, La Marseillaise is trickier. But the call of ‘Marchons, Marchons’, and the call to rise up against tyranny and oppression makes it one the most emotionally expressive ones in this list. The striking images it conjures, and the emotional appeal to rise up against injustice is magnificent. Heck, even the long term foes across the English Channel call it one of the best anthems ever written.
[Here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7MQ-SC9bmp4) is one of the best-known renditions of La Marseillaise

This next song also originated in France, but it was translated into many languages and truly transcends the boundaries of languages and nations, and quite lives up to its name. Infact, it was intended that “L’Internationale” would share the tune with La Marseillaise. However today, it is the universal song of left-wing and socialist groups. It is not clear how this came to be. As the Bolshevik movement gained a foothold in Russian politics, Lenin and his comrades needed a new set of symbols and slogans to give the new Russia a distinct identity, and thus came the hammer and sickle, and other such communist slogans. Perhaps it was in this climate that the French L’Internationale was translated into Russian and adopted as the National Hymn of Russia (note: Russia, not Soviet Union. The Soviet Union did not legally exist until 1922, however the Communists had already established Russia as a socialist country by 1918-1919). Later on, The International was replaced by the Soviet Anthem, but the Communist Party retained the song. As the communist ideology spread across the world, into places like China, North Korea, Cuba, Eastern Europe, and even in India, the US and Britain, the International was translated and sung in Hungarian, Spanish, German, English. In Bengal, as the 50s and 60s witnessed a resentment to the zamindari culture, and rich and upper class Bengalis were branded “bourgeoisie” by the left wing parties, the Internationale was even sung widely in Bengali, translated by Hemanga Biswas. I clearly remember election rallies in 2006 and ’11 when these were blasted out of speakers literally at every electricity pole.
While I do not subscribe to the left-wing ideas, the song is nevertheless a powerful one, calling workers, farmers, and the oppressed to take control of their destinies, and has meaning beyond socialism. I might add a funny incident here. When the Berlin Wall fell in 1989, citizens of the Communist East Germany sang the international in an ironic twist of fate, showing the Communist East German regime that they were infact the oppressors. 
[Here is an orchestral version](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Eqm9iSoHBdU) with the lyrics in Russian.
